Mid-Century Modernist Bus Tour: 
Grounds & Friends

Join renowned architecture enthusiast, Martin Miles on a bus tour around Canberra’s best architecture including mid-century modernist icons by Grounds and other architects.

Roy Grounds (1905-1981) was a renowned Victorian architect and a leader in Australia’s modern architecture movement. During his early career he spent some time working in the United States and England and after the war he was involved in setting up the curriculum for the School of Architecture at the University of Melbourne. Between 1953 and 1962, Grounds was part of the Grounds, Romberg and Boyd partnership, in which time he designed the Australian Academy of Science in Canberra.

This tour will pick-up and drop-off from the Corner of Parkes Pl W and Queen Elizabeth Terrace. After the tour, participants are invited to Sunday Sessions – music by local acts, a series of large-scale graphic interventions, and an award-winning architectural pop-up wine bar, the Pop Inn.


----


Mid-Century Modernist Bus Tour: 
Boyd & Friends

Join renowned architecture enthusiast, Martin Miles on a bus tour around Canberra’s best architecture including mid-century modernist icons by Boyd and other architects.

Robin Boyd (1919-1971), born and educated in Melbourne, was a distinguished architect, writer and social commentator and throughout the 1940s and 1950s was Australia’s leading proponent of the modern movement. Boyd held a lifelong interest in modern architecture tempered by regional concerns. His early work employed structuralist solutions to overcome what he considered to be the deficiencies of most housing of the period and he was a leading practitioner of the post-war Melbourne regional style. The suburban house was often the focus of Boyd’s efforts, both in design and writing, and he enjoyed relatively few opportunities to design major buildings.

This tour will pick-up and drop-off from the corner of Watson Street and Gould Street in Turner. After the tour, participants are invited to Sunday Sessions – music by local acts, a series of large-scale graphic interventions, and an award-winning architectural pop-up wine bar, the Pop Inn.




----



Mid Century Modern Tour #3

Use and Re-Use

Back by popular demand, this year’s architecture tours will take their cue from the Design Canberra theme: geometry. The  Design Canberra festival will celebrate the strong geometry present throughout our city and the ways it creates human, creative and global connections.

The tours will introduce people to architects who have used geometric forms in a variety of ways to shape spaces for people. How have the designers of these houses and buildings used geometric principles to create dwellings that comfort and inspire their occupants? From simple rectilinear forms and modular designs to complex examples using the Pythagorean spiral and hemicycle, we’ll visit some of Canberra’s most significant houses and buildings.

This tour looks at the future of mid-century design. We’ll visit mid-century houses, an embassy and a church. How are they meeting the needs of occupants today, and how are people adapting them for current and future needs?

The tours will be presented by local architecture enthusiast and author of Canberra House, Martin Miles. The tours will also feature a variety of special guests, including internationally renowned architects and planners. Please meet at the Civic Square bus stop at 8:50am. (Buses will depart and return to this location each week.)

Please note that the bus, as well as some locations, will require stair access as well as moderate walking. Please contact us if you have any questions regarding accessibility.

Photo: https://designcanberrafestival.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/DC-Website-banner-65.png 





Photo: https://designcanberrafestival.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/DC-Website-banner-43.png